To see some examples of LCOV generated HTML coverage reports, run

   $ make

in the .../examples directory, review the 'make' log and the generated
data, and then point a web browser into the resulting reports.

The example builds with GCC by default.
You will need to make a few changes if you want to use LLVM instead.


Default view:

  - Point your browser to
      output/index.html

Hierarchical view:

  - Point your browser to
      hierarchical/index.html

  - Note that that the coverage data is the same - only the report
    format is different:

       - Follows directory structure, similar to MS file viewer
         ('--hierarchical' flag)

       - Additional navigation links also enabled
         ('--show-navigation' flag)

Differential coverage:

  - Point your browser to
      exampleRepo/differential/index.html

  - This example is slightly complicated because it emulates a moderately
    realistic project in that it pretends to see project changes:

       - updates to two project source files example.c and iterate.c

       - change to the test suite: only one test of updated
         code rather than 3 of the original code

  - The Makefile simulates this by checking code into a git repo,
    building an executable and then updating a few source files, rebuildling,
    and running some tests.

Code review:

  - point your browser to
      exampleRepo/review/index.html

  - This example builds on the "Differential coverage" example, above
    to emulate a possible code review methodology in which adds code
    coverage to the review criteria.
    The intent is to generate a reduced report which shows only the
    code changes which negatively affect code coverage - while removing
    other details which only distract from the review.

      - Use the 'genhtml --select-script ...' feature to show only new
        source code which was negatively affected by the change under
        review (uncovered and/or lost code).
        You might want to modify the select criteria to include positive
        change (e.g., GNC, GBC, and GIC categories).

      - Real use cases are likely to use more sophisticated select-script
        callbacks (e.g., to select from a range of changelists).

Feel free to edit the Makefile or to run the lcov utilities directly,
to see the effect of other options that you find in the lcov man pages.
